docs/atlas/rust-belt-atlas-tech-plan.md, before:

# Rust Belt Atlas – Technical Plan (v0.1 Draft)

Rust Belt Atlas is the **scoring and clustering engine** for the Rust Belt project.  
It ingests store lists, affluence data, and observations to produce Value–Yield scores, metro anchors, and clusters.  
Atlas outputs are consumed by the Rust Belt Solver.

---

## Goals

1. **Per-store scoring**: assign Value and Yield scores that align with observed trip outcomes.  
2. **Anchors**: identify natural metro-level clusters (exploration areas).  
3. **Sub-clusters**: identify curated pockets within anchors.  
4. **Explainability**: provide a transparent trace of scoring decisions.  
5. **Interoperability**: output formats compatible with Solver inputs.  
6. **Scalability**: support new metros without rewriting desk estimates by leaning on affluence and adjacency priors.  

---

## Architecture

### Modules
- **Data Ingestion**  
  - Store list (CSV/JSON).  
  - Affluence data (ACS census, turnover, housing, retail density).  
  - Observations (Value–Yield, notes, dates).  

- **Scoring Engine**
  - Baseline priors by store type.
  - Affluence adjustments (boost/dampen Value/Yield).
  - Adjacency inference (smooth toward neighbor means).
  - Observed override (posterior mean from trip data).
  - Blend manager exposing \( \omega \), prior, and posterior components for Value/Yield in outputs and diagnostics.
  - Output: per-store Value, Yield, Composite JScore.

- **Anchor Detection**  
  - Algorithm: DBSCAN/HDBSCAN on lat/lon (minPts=3–5).  
  - Anchor record: `AnchorId, centroid, store count, mean Value, mean Yield`.  

- **Cluster Detection**  
  - Within anchors, apply fine-grained clustering by lat/lon + score similarity.  
  - Output: `ClusterId, AnchorId, member stores, centroid`.  

- **Explainability**  
  - Per-store trace of contributions (baseline + affluence + adjacency + observed).  
  - Human-readable strings + machine-readable JSON.  

- **Diagnostics**  
  - Correlation between affluence signals and observed Value/Yield.  
  - Distribution scatterplots.  
  - Anchor summaries.  

---

## CLI Workflow

Atlas exposes three CLI subcommands: `score`, `anchors`, and `subclusters`. Refer to the [Atlas CLI reference](./rust-belt-atlas-cli-reference.md) for exhaustive flag descriptions and schema validation notes. Canonical invocations:

```bash
# Blended scoring with diagnostics
rustbelt-atlas score \
  --stores data/stores.csv \
  --affluence data/affluence.csv \
  --observations data/observations.csv \
  --mode blended \
  --lambda 0.6 \
  --output out/scored-stores.csv \
  --trace-out out/scored-trace.jsonl \
  --posterior-trace out/posterior-trace.csv

# Posterior-only scoring (no priors)
rustbelt-atlas score \
  --stores data/stores.csv \
  --observations data/observations.csv \
  --mode posterior-only \
  --ecdf-window metro \
  --lambda 0.6 \
  --output out/scored-post.csv \
  --trace-out out/posterior-trace.jsonl

# Detect metro anchors
rustbelt-atlas anchors \
  --stores data/stores.csv \
  --affluence data/affluence.csv \
  --output out/anchors.csv \
  --store-assignments out/anchor-assignments.csv \
  --metrics out/anchor-metrics.json

# Materialise sub-clusters for a specific anchor
rustbelt-atlas subclusters \
  --anchor-id metro-anchor-001 \
  --spec data/subcluster-spec.json \
  --output out/subclusters.jsonl \
  --id-prefix metro-anchor-001-sc
```

Key shared flags:

- `--mode {prior-only,posterior-only,blended}` controls scoring behaviour.
- `--lambda <0..1>` emits the λ-weighted `Composite` column in addition to `Value` and `Yield`.
- `--trace-out PATH` writes a combined stage trace (JSONL/CSV).
- `--posterior-trace PATH` exports posterior-only diagnostics and triggers diagnostics sidecars.
- `--store-assignments PATH` and `--metrics PATH` extend anchor exports with assignments and QA metrics.

All scoring runs validate payloads against the v1 schemas before writing any outputs.

---

## Data Schemas

Loader inputs and outputs align with the JSON Schemas under `schema/atlas/v1` and the data loaders in `packages/atlas-python`.

### Input: `stores.csv`

| StoreId | Name | Type | Lat | Lon | GeoId | ChainFlag (opt) | Notes (opt) |

### Input: `affluence.csv`

| GeoId | MedianIncome | PctHH_100kPlus | PctRenters | Population | Metro (opt) |

### Input: `observations.csv`

| StoreId | DateTime | DwellMin | PurchasedItems | HaulLikert | ObserverId (opt) | Spend (opt) | Notes (opt) |

### Output: `scored-stores.csv`

| StoreId | Value | Yield | Composite | Omega | ValuePrior | ValuePosterior | YieldPrior | YieldPosterior | Theta | Cred | Method | ECDF_q |

### Output: `anchors.csv`

| AnchorId | Name | Lat | Lon | StoreCount | MeanValue | MeanYield | GeoId (opt) |

### Output: `subclusters.jsonl`

Each row contains `AnchorId`, `SubclusterId`, centroid coordinates, membership list, and summary statistics (`StoreCount`, `MeanValue`, `MeanYield`). Files are validated against [`schema/atlas/v1/cluster.schema.json`](../../schema/atlas/v1/cluster.schema.json).

---

## Package & Directory Strategy

### Objectives

- Guarantee Atlas can be developed, tested, and released without any compile-time or runtime dependency on the existing Solver tooling.
- Provide clear ownership boundaries so Atlas contributors do not need the Solver node toolchain, and vice versa.
- Create space for the Python-first Atlas prototype while leaving a migration path to a TypeScript port once the modeling solidifies.

### Proposed Repository Layout

```
/docs/
/schema/                    # JSON/CSV contracts shared across projects (read-only dependencies)
/packages/
  atlas-python/             # Python package (Phase 1 focus)
    pyproject.toml
    src/atlas/
      __init__.py
      cli/
      data/
      scoring/
      clustering/
      explain/
      diagnostics/
      fixtures/
    tests/
  solver-cli/               # Existing TypeScript CLI moved from /src (no Atlas imports)
    package.json
    tsconfig.json
    src/
    tests/
/tools/                     # Optional shared utilities (lint hooks, formatters) with language-specific subfolders
```

- **Atlas package**: published as `atlas-python` (internal), exposes `atlas.cli` entry points (`score`, `anchors`, `subclusters`). Dependencies live in `pyproject.toml` so Node modules are not required.
- **Solver package**: retains current functionality but relocated under `packages/solver-cli` with unchanged build scripts. Solver consumes Atlas outputs only via files in `/schema` (e.g., versioned CSV layout, JSON schema) and never imports Python code.
- **Schema directory**: houses the versioned data contracts that mediate Atlas ↔ Solver exchange. Both sides depend on this directory **read-only**; no runtime linkage.
- **Top-level tooling**: optional scripts (e.g., Makefile, CI) orchestrate `pip` and `npm` commands without mingling dependency graphs.

### Enforcing Independence in Code

- Distinct package managers (`pip` for Atlas, `npm` for Solver) and lockfiles stored beside each package prevent accidental cross-installation.
- CI will run `pytest`/`ruff` for Atlas and `vitest`/`eslint` for Solver in separate jobs; any import attempt across the boundary will fail because the other language runtime is not installed in that job.
- Shared artifacts are serialized files only. The Atlas CLI writes to `/out` (or configured path) using schemas defined in `/schema`. Solver integration tests read those fixtures but never import Atlas modules.
- Introduce interface tests in Solver that use frozen Atlas output fixtures checked into `packages/atlas-python/fixtures/solver-contract/`. Updates require bumping the schema version and regenerating fixtures via the Atlas CLI.

### Option Analysis

| Option | Description | Pros | Cons |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **A. Minimal movement** | Keep current Solver layout in `/src`, drop Atlas under `/atlas` | Lowest churn today; no path changes for Solver developers | Mixed toolchains at repo root; harder to communicate boundaries; risk of accidental imports as Solver evolves |
| **B. Dedicated `/packages` monorepo (recommended)** | Relocate Solver to `/packages/solver-cli`; place Atlas prototype in `/packages/atlas-python`; share schemas via `/schema` | Clear ownership, isolated dependencies, mirrors common monorepo practices (npm/pip side-by-side), simplifies CI matrix | One-time refactor of Solver paths/build scripts; developers update import paths referencing compiled bundles |
| **C. Separate repositories** | Split Atlas into its own repo | Absolute isolation | Adds release coordination overhead; loses shared Git history and shared schema folder |

Option **B** balances isolation with maintainability. We absorb a one-time move of Solver code but keep a unified repo for change management and shared contracts.

### Tooling & Automation Implications

- Update root `package.json` scripts or introduce a top-level `Makefile` to forward to `pip`/`npm` tasks (`make atlas-test`, `make solver-build`).
- Add `.pre-commit-config.yaml` limited to Atlas Python checks; Solver retains ESLint/Prettier via npm scripts.
- Document environment setup in `docs/atlas/README.md`, specifying that Atlas contributors only need Python ≥3.11 and optional virtualenv tooling.
- Create CI workflows: `ci-atlas.yml` (setup-python → install → lint/test) and `ci-solver.yml` (setup-node → install → lint/test). Shared schema updates trigger both workflows via a path filter on `/schema`.

## Implementation Plan

### Phase 0 (Repo Preparation)

* Introduce the `/packages` + `/schema` structure without altering Solver functionality.
* Scaffold `packages/atlas-python` with `pyproject.toml`, `src/atlas/cli/__main__.py`, and placeholder modules for scoring/anchoring to unblock incremental commits.
* Configure CI jobs (Python + Node) and update documentation to reference the new directory layout.

### Phase 1 (v0.1 Prototype)

* Implement scoring engine in Python (pandas, geopandas).
* CLI: `score` command only.
* Output: scored stores with Value, Yield, and machine-captured trace fields to unblock later explainability UI.

- Implement Posterior-Only pipeline:
  - Fit Yield GLM with offset; fallback to NegBin if overdispersed.
  - Fit Value OLS (MVP).
  - If n too small: hierarchical pooling by type/anchor; otherwise k-NN smoothing.
  - Compute ECDF on observed θ̂ and map predictions to Y.
  - Emit Cred (e.g., 1 − normalized SE) and Method.


### Phase 2 (v0.2)

* Add metro anchors (DBSCAN clustering).
* Promote explainability traces to user-facing outputs, leveraging the trace fields landed in Phase 1.
* Introduce diagnostics (scatterplots, correlation tables).

### Phase 3 (v0.3)

* Add sub-cluster detection.
* Refine affluence adjustment model.
* Output Solver-compatible candidate sets.

### Phase 4 (Integration)

* Evaluate TypeScript parity for Atlas logic once Python models stabilize; spin up `packages/atlas-ts` if parity is justified, generated from shared schema definitions.
* Maintain Solver integration strictly through schema-driven file exchange; publish any reusable logic as independent libraries rather than direct package imports.
* Optional: introduce orchestration scripts (e.g., `make run-all`) that call Atlas CLI then Solver CLI sequentially while preserving package isolation.

---

## Additional Technical Considerations Before Implementation

### Data Validation & Contracts

- Define JSON Schema files in `/schema/atlas/v1/` for `scored-stores`, `anchors`, and `subclusters`, and use them both for Atlas output validation (via `jsonschema` in Python) and Solver ingestion tests (via TypeScript validators).
- Version schemas (`v1`, `v1.1`, …) to allow non-breaking additions; Atlas exposes a `--schema-version` flag with default `latest`.

### Configuration Management

- Store CLI defaults in `atlas/config/defaults.yaml`, override via `--config` flag, and surface applied configuration in run metadata.
- Provide an `.env` template for sensitive paths (e.g., census API tokens) and load them only within Atlas; no leakage to Solver environment variables.

### Observability & Telemetry

- Emit structured logs (JSONL) from Atlas CLI capturing dataset checksums, parameter choices, and timing for each stage; logs stored beside outputs for reproducibility.
- Plan for optional Prometheus metrics if Atlas graduates to a service, but keep CLI instrumentation simple (`click` progress bars + final summary table).

### Testing Enhancements

- Expand golden fixtures covering edge-case metros (dense urban vs sparse rural) stored under `packages/atlas-python/fixtures/`.
- Provide contract tests ensuring the Atlas CLI refuses to overwrite Solver fixture directories unless `--force` is specified, reducing accidental regression noise.

### Documentation

- Author `docs/atlas/README.md` with setup instructions, architectural diagrams, and CLI walkthroughs.
- Cross-link Solver docs to the schema directory instead of Atlas internals, reinforcing the package boundary.

---

## Feedback Loop

1. **User runs Atlas** to score stores and generate anchors/subclusters.
2. **User geo-curates**: select metros/subclusters for inclusion in Solver runs.
3. **Solver produces itineraries**.
4. **User executes trip and logs observations**.
5. **Observations flow back into Atlas** → priors updated → next iteration improves.

---

*Rust Belt Atlas maps the landscape; Rust Belt Solver plans the journey.*

Commit message:

Normalize GeoId handling for affluence joins

docs/atlas/rust-belt-atlas-tech-plan.md, after:

# Rust Belt Atlas – Technical Plan (v0.1 Draft)

Rust Belt Atlas is the **scoring and clustering engine** for the Rust Belt project.  
It ingests store lists, affluence data, and observations to produce Value–Yield scores, metro anchors, and clusters.  
Atlas outputs are consumed by the Rust Belt Solver.

---

## Goals

1. **Per-store scoring**: assign Value and Yield scores that align with observed trip outcomes.  
2. **Anchors**: identify natural metro-level clusters (exploration areas).  
3. **Sub-clusters**: identify curated pockets within anchors.  
4. **Explainability**: provide a transparent trace of scoring decisions.  
5. **Interoperability**: output formats compatible with Solver inputs.  
6. **Scalability**: support new metros without rewriting desk estimates by leaning on affluence and adjacency priors.  

---

## Architecture

### Modules
- **Data Ingestion**  
  - Store list (CSV/JSON).  
  - Affluence data (ACS census, turnover, housing, retail density).  
  - Observations (Value–Yield, notes, dates).  

- **Scoring Engine**
  - Baseline priors by store type.
  - Affluence adjustments (boost/dampen Value/Yield).
  - Adjacency inference (smooth toward neighbor means).
  - Observed override (posterior mean from trip data).
  - Blend manager exposing \( \omega \), prior, and posterior components for Value/Yield in outputs and diagnostics.
  - Output: per-store Value, Yield, Composite JScore.

- **Anchor Detection**  
  - Algorithm: DBSCAN/HDBSCAN on lat/lon (minPts=3–5).  
  - Anchor record: `AnchorId, centroid, store count, mean Value, mean Yield`.  

- **Cluster Detection**  
  - Within anchors, apply fine-grained clustering by lat/lon + score similarity.  
  - Output: `ClusterId, AnchorId, member stores, centroid`.  

- **Explainability**  
  - Per-store trace of contributions (baseline + affluence + adjacency + observed).  
  - Human-readable strings + machine-readable JSON.  

- **Diagnostics**  
  - Correlation between affluence signals and observed Value/Yield.  
  - Distribution scatterplots.  
  - Anchor summaries.  

---

## CLI Workflow

Atlas exposes three CLI subcommands: `score`, `anchors`, and `subclusters`. Refer to the [Atlas CLI reference](./rust-belt-atlas-cli-reference.md) for exhaustive flag descriptions and schema validation notes. Canonical invocations:

```bash
# Blended scoring with diagnostics
rustbelt-atlas score \
  --stores data/stores.csv \
  --affluence data/affluence.csv \
  --observations data/observations.csv \
  --mode blended \
  --lambda 0.6 \
  --output out/scored-stores.csv \
  --trace-out out/scored-trace.jsonl \
  --posterior-trace out/posterior-trace.csv

# Posterior-only scoring (no priors)
rustbelt-atlas score \
  --stores data/stores.csv \
  --observations data/observations.csv \
  --mode posterior-only \
  --ecdf-window metro \
  --lambda 0.6 \
  --output out/scored-post.csv \
  --trace-out out/posterior-trace.jsonl

# Detect metro anchors
rustbelt-atlas anchors \
  --stores data/stores.csv \
  --affluence data/affluence.csv \
  --output out/anchors.csv \
  --store-assignments out/anchor-assignments.csv \
  --metrics out/anchor-metrics.json

# Materialise sub-clusters for a specific anchor
rustbelt-atlas subclusters \
  --anchor-id metro-anchor-001 \
  --spec data/subcluster-spec.json \
  --output out/subclusters.jsonl \
  --id-prefix metro-anchor-001-sc
```

Key shared flags:

- `--mode {prior-only,posterior-only,blended}` controls scoring behaviour.
- `--lambda <0..1>` emits the λ-weighted `Composite` column in addition to `Value` and `Yield`.
- `--trace-out PATH` writes a combined stage trace (JSONL/CSV).
- `--posterior-trace PATH` exports posterior-only diagnostics and triggers diagnostics sidecars.
- `--store-assignments PATH` and `--metrics PATH` extend anchor exports with assignments and QA metrics.

All scoring runs validate payloads against the v1 schemas before writing any outputs.

---

## Data Schemas

Loader inputs and outputs align with the JSON Schemas under `schema/atlas/v1` and the data loaders in `packages/atlas-python`.

### Input: `stores.csv`

| StoreId | Name | Type | Lat | Lon | GeoId | ChainFlag (opt) | Notes (opt) |

`GeoId` is required when affluence covariates are supplied and is treated as a string identifier, even if the CSV parser infers a numeric type.

### Input: `affluence.csv`

| GeoId | MedianIncome | PctHH_100kPlus | PctRenters | Population | Metro (opt) |

### Input: `observations.csv`

| StoreId | DateTime | DwellMin | PurchasedItems | HaulLikert | ObserverId (opt) | Spend (opt) | Notes (opt) |

### Output: `scored-stores.csv`

| StoreId | Value | Yield | Composite | Omega | ValuePrior | ValuePosterior | YieldPrior | YieldPosterior | Theta | Cred | Method | ECDF_q |

### Output: `anchors.csv`

| AnchorId | Name | Lat | Lon | StoreCount | MeanValue | MeanYield | GeoId (opt) |

### Output: `subclusters.jsonl`

Each row contains `AnchorId`, `SubclusterId`, centroid coordinates, membership list, and summary statistics (`StoreCount`, `MeanValue`, `MeanYield`). Files are validated against [`schema/atlas/v1/cluster.schema.json`](../../schema/atlas/v1/cluster.schema.json).

---

## Package & Directory Strategy

### Objectives

- Guarantee Atlas can be developed, tested, and released without any compile-time or runtime dependency on the existing Solver tooling.
- Provide clear ownership boundaries so Atlas contributors do not need the Solver node toolchain, and vice versa.
- Create space for the Python-first Atlas prototype while leaving a migration path to a TypeScript port once the modeling solidifies.

### Proposed Repository Layout

```
/docs/
/schema/                    # JSON/CSV contracts shared across projects (read-only dependencies)
/packages/
  atlas-python/             # Python package (Phase 1 focus)
    pyproject.toml
    src/atlas/
      __init__.py
      cli/
      data/
      scoring/
      clustering/
      explain/
      diagnostics/
      fixtures/
    tests/
  solver-cli/               # Existing TypeScript CLI moved from /src (no Atlas imports)
    package.json
    tsconfig.json
    src/
    tests/
/tools/                     # Optional shared utilities (lint hooks, formatters) with language-specific subfolders
```

- **Atlas package**: published as `atlas-python` (internal), exposes `atlas.cli` entry points (`score`, `anchors`, `subclusters`). Dependencies live in `pyproject.toml` so Node modules are not required.
- **Solver package**: retains current functionality but relocated under `packages/solver-cli` with unchanged build scripts. Solver consumes Atlas outputs only via files in `/schema` (e.g., versioned CSV layout, JSON schema) and never imports Python code.
- **Schema directory**: houses the versioned data contracts that mediate Atlas ↔ Solver exchange. Both sides depend on this directory **read-only**; no runtime linkage.
- **Top-level tooling**: optional scripts (e.g., Makefile, CI) orchestrate `pip` and `npm` commands without mingling dependency graphs.

### Enforcing Independence in Code

- Distinct package managers (`pip` for Atlas, `npm` for Solver) and lockfiles stored beside each package prevent accidental cross-installation.
- CI will run `pytest`/`ruff` for Atlas and `vitest`/`eslint` for Solver in separate jobs; any import attempt across the boundary will fail because the other language runtime is not installed in that job.
- Shared artifacts are serialized files only. The Atlas CLI writes to `/out` (or configured path) using schemas defined in `/schema`. Solver integration tests read those fixtures but never import Atlas modules.
- Introduce interface tests in Solver that use frozen Atlas output fixtures checked into `packages/atlas-python/fixtures/solver-contract/`. Updates require bumping the schema version and regenerating fixtures via the Atlas CLI.

### Option Analysis

| Option | Description | Pros | Cons |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **A. Minimal movement** | Keep current Solver layout in `/src`, drop Atlas under `/atlas` | Lowest churn today; no path changes for Solver developers | Mixed toolchains at repo root; harder to communicate boundaries; risk of accidental imports as Solver evolves |
| **B. Dedicated `/packages` monorepo (recommended)** | Relocate Solver to `/packages/solver-cli`; place Atlas prototype in `/packages/atlas-python`; share schemas via `/schema` | Clear ownership, isolated dependencies, mirrors common monorepo practices (npm/pip side-by-side), simplifies CI matrix | One-time refactor of Solver paths/build scripts; developers update import paths referencing compiled bundles |
| **C. Separate repositories** | Split Atlas into its own repo | Absolute isolation | Adds release coordination overhead; loses shared Git history and shared schema folder |

Option **B** balances isolation with maintainability. We absorb a one-time move of Solver code but keep a unified repo for change management and shared contracts.

### Tooling & Automation Implications

- Update root `package.json` scripts or introduce a top-level `Makefile` to forward to `pip`/`npm` tasks (`make atlas-test`, `make solver-build`).
- Add `.pre-commit-config.yaml` limited to Atlas Python checks; Solver retains ESLint/Prettier via npm scripts.
- Document environment setup in `docs/atlas/README.md`, specifying that Atlas contributors only need Python ≥3.11 and optional virtualenv tooling.
- Create CI workflows: `ci-atlas.yml` (setup-python → install → lint/test) and `ci-solver.yml` (setup-node → install → lint/test). Shared schema updates trigger both workflows via a path filter on `/schema`.

## Implementation Plan

### Phase 0 (Repo Preparation)

* Introduce the `/packages` + `/schema` structure without altering Solver functionality.
* Scaffold `packages/atlas-python` with `pyproject.toml`, `src/atlas/cli/__main__.py`, and placeholder modules for scoring/anchoring to unblock incremental commits.
* Configure CI jobs (Python + Node) and update documentation to reference the new directory layout.

### Phase 1 (v0.1 Prototype)

* Implement scoring engine in Python (pandas, geopandas).
* CLI: `score` command only.
* Output: scored stores with Value, Yield, and machine-captured trace fields to unblock later explainability UI.

- Implement Posterior-Only pipeline:
  - Fit Yield GLM with offset; fallback to NegBin if overdispersed.
  - Fit Value OLS (MVP).
  - If n too small: hierarchical pooling by type/anchor; otherwise k-NN smoothing.
  - Compute ECDF on observed θ̂ and map predictions to Y.
  - Emit Cred (e.g., 1 − normalized SE) and Method.


### Phase 2 (v0.2)

* Add metro anchors (DBSCAN clustering).
* Promote explainability traces to user-facing outputs, leveraging the trace fields landed in Phase 1.
* Introduce diagnostics (scatterplots, correlation tables).

### Phase 3 (v0.3)

* Add sub-cluster detection.
* Refine affluence adjustment model.
* Output Solver-compatible candidate sets.

### Phase 4 (Integration)

* Evaluate TypeScript parity for Atlas logic once Python models stabilize; spin up `packages/atlas-ts` if parity is justified, generated from shared schema definitions.
* Maintain Solver integration strictly through schema-driven file exchange; publish any reusable logic as independent libraries rather than direct package imports.
* Optional: introduce orchestration scripts (e.g., `make run-all`) that call Atlas CLI then Solver CLI sequentially while preserving package isolation.

---

## Additional Technical Considerations Before Implementation

### Data Validation & Contracts

- Define JSON Schema files in `/schema/atlas/v1/` for `scored-stores`, `anchors`, and `subclusters`, and use them both for Atlas output validation (via `jsonschema` in Python) and Solver ingestion tests (via TypeScript validators).
- Version schemas (`v1`, `v1.1`, …) to allow non-breaking additions; Atlas exposes a `--schema-version` flag with default `latest`.

### Configuration Management

- Store CLI defaults in `atlas/config/defaults.yaml`, override via `--config` flag, and surface applied configuration in run metadata.
- Provide an `.env` template for sensitive paths (e.g., census API tokens) and load them only within Atlas; no leakage to Solver environment variables.

### Observability & Telemetry

- Emit structured logs (JSONL) from Atlas CLI capturing dataset checksums, parameter choices, and timing for each stage; logs stored beside outputs for reproducibility.
- Plan for optional Prometheus metrics if Atlas graduates to a service, but keep CLI instrumentation simple (`click` progress bars + final summary table).

### Testing Enhancements

- Expand golden fixtures covering edge-case metros (dense urban vs sparse rural) stored under `packages/atlas-python/fixtures/`.
- Provide contract tests ensuring the Atlas CLI refuses to overwrite Solver fixture directories unless `--force` is specified, reducing accidental regression noise.

### Documentation

- Author `docs/atlas/README.md` with setup instructions, architectural diagrams, and CLI walkthroughs.
- Cross-link Solver docs to the schema directory instead of Atlas internals, reinforcing the package boundary.

---

## Feedback Loop

1. **User runs Atlas** to score stores and generate anchors/subclusters.
2. **User geo-curates**: select metros/subclusters for inclusion in Solver runs.
3. **Solver produces itineraries**.
4. **User executes trip and logs observations**.
5. **Observations flow back into Atlas** → priors updated → next iteration improves.

---

*Rust Belt Atlas maps the landscape; Rust Belt Solver plans the journey.*
